Welcome to Mouth Off, a podcast brought to you by Forget Me Not Productions.
My name is Clary Sadler and on today's episode I'm going to be talking about the iPlusMatter project,
which is a heritage lottery funded project conceived by T. Gwynn Special School in Cardiff
and inclusive arts organisation Forget Me Not Productions.
iPlusMatter provided multiple opportunities for meaningful assistive technology experiences.
These were interwoven with the arts and music was used as a motivator to enable individuals with
the most complex physical and cognitive disabilities to share their own history and celebrate their
independent achievements. The project was launched in February 2020 and was due to conclude in July
of that year. We were going to have a training event called iPlusMatter Festival and it was going
to involve professionals in the field of special education and social and health sectors. It was
also going to be a celebration of the achievements of all involved. The participants would use a
range of assistive technology such as eye gaze, switches and touch monitors in order to help them
achieve and independently take part in music and arts sessions. Due to Covid-19 the project was
postponed and we had to adapt the sharing event and the training event to fit a virtual platform,
pupils at five local special schools, adults from a local day centre and three individuals all with
complex needs took part in assistive technology and inclusive arts sessions called MusicCan.
MusicCan is a protocol developed by Forget Me Not Production and it uses music primarily as a
motivator to engage individuals with the most complex needs in assistive technology. T. Gwynn
with the project lead and other partners included My Sebu Special School, Trinity
Fields Special School, Park Lane Special School, Gadliss Day Centre and three private clients that
had all worked with Forget Me Not Productions in the past. Most of the face-to-face MusicCan sessions
had resumed by the end of 2021 but sadly due to ongoing Covid-19 restrictions Trinity Fields
Special School had to pull out. Luckily Askol Henvelin Special School stepped in and had the
remaining sessions enabling us to wrap up the project. So what exactly do we mean by assistive
technology? Well for the purpose of this project we are using the term assistive technology to
include any specialist technology that enables access to a computer. So things such as switches,
touch monitors, eye gaze which is a computer that is operated by eye movements and these are linked
to specialist software for teaching cause and effect, choice making and beyond, augmentative
and alternative communication or AAC, specialist controls for wheelchair driving and access to
toys and play. So when eye gaze first became commercially available it was really mostly
suited for people who were already at a level of using AAC and perhaps were using AAC with
switches, switches being very effective but slow, slow and laborious. Another focus of iPlusMatter
has been to provide staff members with the opportunities to be trained in the implementation
of assistive technology systems for those with the most complex disabilities. Why do you think
projects such as this iPlusMatter funded by the Heritage Lottery Fund are so important for the
individuals that have been taking part from your school? Well assistive technology like we did have
eye gaze machines here but they were and they would come on and they'd be broken and they'd
obsolete. So it's only now that we've started to use the eye gaze because we've all returned
your project is brought to me and we're using one parent to set an eye gaze in so we're trying to
re-establish those and also we want to start training the staff and really to see what
opportunities we can use with the eye gaze. It's wonderful with your project because you can see
how well the children have responded to it and how much you really need that in our school.
What have been the main benefits that you've seen from the individuals that have taken part
So to see how much they've progressed in the two weeks has been amazing. I think it's fantastic.
When they get to experience technology and staff get to see what they're capable of by using that
technology which gives us infinite access to move forward with purchasing of ourselves and developing
those skills and pupils get to be able to be part of a project. Parents can share and see that
you can see what the children are working on and I know the way that our pupils have responded.
They've been focused and they've really enjoyed it and I think music is such a wonderful access
for our pupils anyway. So it's just a wonderful way for them to be focused and to be able to get
into that niche and they are there. What are the main barriers for these individuals achieving
independently within a school or daycare setting? The challenge is they need more like
consistency constantly and they need more more technology things to come in for the children
to help them progress higher than where they already are. One of the main aims of the project
has been to empower individuals identified as experiencing profound and multiple learning
disabilities or individuals that have complex physical disabilities. These individuals use
assistive technology to experience independent achievement and throughout the project we use the
MusicCan framework to motivate engagement with this technology changing and shifting the focus
from disability to ability. When I started making music with Forget Me Not productions it changed
my life. Music transformed me. We hope to raise awareness also of the historical development of
assistive technologies and the potential impact for independent learning via new technologies
and new techniques. We speak to Mel Sadler about the history of assistive technology.
But of course by far the biggest development for assistive technology particularly for those
individuals with the greatest cognitive impairments has been the development of eye gaze. So eye gaze
worked really well for that group of people straight away. But it took some time for eye gaze
to be suited for software to come out and be made available for people with more significant
intellectual impairments as well as their physical disability. But once software such as Look2Learn
sensory eye effects and some of the inclusive technology softwares became available for eye
gaze users it's really opened up a whole new world for that group of learners which is just
just amazing. And you see people making choices using eye gaze who I would have considered it
being very difficult to teach them to make choices using switches because using switches to make
choices is a much higher cognitive load if that makes sense. Yet they can do it with eye gaze.
We also talk to assistive technology guru Carol Thornett. Dr Carol Thornett has been involved
in the field of assistive technology since 1986. She was a pioneer in exploring the use of assistive
technology with individuals experiencing profound and multiple learning disabilities. In fact it was
Carol that developed the first mobility platform which was originally part of the Spastic Society
research project and had the aim of enabling children with cerebral palsy to explore mobility
when their peers were able to. With mobility we were trying to get children mobile at the same age
that their peers would be mobile since we extrapolated those with learning difficulties
and physical difficulty obviously as well. But initially it was just a physical difficulty.
That proved to be really exciting and I think it's quite sad now that I see so few with independent
mobility. They should be in their usual seating because that was always such a problem if they
were to have a wheelchair service in that what seating would they use. So this was you know that's
really the reason why it was a platform that you could attach the whole seating system
so that you started by looking at whether they could control it and what they would do and
they stop and stop it as important as going so on. The historic Cragher Park school has also
been a heritage partner throughout the i-Plus-Matter sessions. Cragher Park House is a country house in
Pentirk, Cardiff. It was built in 1914 for a colliery owner named Thomas Evans. Evans died in 1943
and Cragher Park then came into the possession of the National Coal Board before being sold in 1954
to the Spastic Society. They opened a residential school site in 1955 and the house still operates
as a residential care facility today. It is also a special school for young adults with learning
disabilities which is operated by Salutum Healthcare. The school I work in is catered
for people with disabilities. Research the school you're going to work in and the students you're
going to work with and then it's just a case of getting to know your colleagues and then getting
to know you and that should make your job hopefully a lot easier. That was one of the first
things people used to look at and say. Last time probably a student but that doesn't happen anymore
because I'm older and I grow beards and stuff like that so that tends not to happen anymore.
Well my powered wheelchair it can well the batteries last longer which means I can stay out
for longer I can socialize for longer and be in work for longer and secondly my power chair then
can also so as you can see the chair the chair that I'm sitting in is actually right in
which then also helps me in my job professionally when I'm working with students with standing
frames who are in standing frame sorry and also helps me socially when there is no seating available
for other people I can then rise myself up to the level that the person is standing to
and then when I'm when I'm done you just go back down so it's basically far different now so
used to be there's no comparison because now I can turn lights on using my voice
whereas when I was younger I wasn't able well I wasn't able to read I wasn't able to really
reach the light switches due to them being on a different level. What would you say
you're most proud of something you've achieved maybe through your use of technology
that's helped you achieve that thing?
Could be related to school or it could be games games
and remote control controls so you're quite the expert when it comes to games and
working with control. Yes I need help trying out accessible instruments
I need help accessing music tech and recording studios. What we're doing through us really
isn't it I guess remotely in the house. When I started making music with Forget Me Not
productions it changed my life music transformed me I feel like I'm finally using my brain properly
and I'm using my brain to make music.
Join me next time when I interview Yvonne Kanicki. Yvonne is a programmer and curator
specializing in black independent film.